---
layout: post
title: !!DRAFT!! Finding a non-academic job (that you actually want) as a research scientist
description: 
date: 2022-11-07
comments: true
tags: 
categories: personal, job
---
# !!This post is very much a work in progress!!



Like many others, I've had a less than enjoyable past few years through the pandemic. With my postdoctoral research contract at UNSW set to end this year I'd been keeping an eye out for interesting future positions in research - or outside of research. In September 2022 I decided that I'd had enough of academia and that I would instead be looking for a non-academic position. I'd applied for quite a few non-academic positions at the end of my PhD without success, but this time around I felt I had a better handle on what to do. This turned out to be the case: five applications for interesting and very different jobs led to three invitations to interview, one of which I declined as and two offers. 

The transition from academia to a non-academic job is a mystical thing to many PhDs and ECRs: surrounded by PhDs, ECRs that were once PhDs, and academics that were once ECRs it can be hard to know what other possibilities exist or how one might go about finding them.

# My context: how did I arrive at this?
This year was the third time in my life going on a serious job hunt. Neither of my first two attempts to find a Real Job were successful, with both ending when I found a next step through through word of mouth/personal contacts

<details>

<summary>

Here's a short bio of how that played out for me.

</summary>

text.

## As a fresh graduate
In 2014 I finished my BSc (Hons) and was somewhat startled to find there wasn't a job waiting for me at the end. I went out looking for job postings that mentioned chemistry (my qualification), found there were very few, and what little there was seemed to have unappealing words like "analytical" or "technician" in the title. Nevertheless I had no success with my applications, and in desperation asked the NMR facility manager at Sydney University if he could employ me. Ian didn't have the funds but thought his counterpart at UNSW might do - and to my surprise, Jim did. I liked the vibe working part-time at UNSW and decided to stay for a PhD, thus postponing any need to find a job for a few moire years.

## At the end of a PhD in Chemistry
As I entered the final year of my PhD I was aware that there wasn't likely to be a job waiting for me at the end. At that time I was uncertain of how impressive my PhD might look at the end (I'd just started writing!) and had no idea if I would be competitive for further reserach as a postdoc, so I began to look into non-academic positions. Knowing (now) that there were few interesting positions for chemists in Australia and with little confidence that employers would care about my PhD, I applied for lots of entry-level grad programs and received no interviews and no human feedback. The whole thing was grim and demotivating.

Finally, I applied for a single mid-level APS5/6 position as a Defence Intelligence Analyst (I'd developed an interested in defence issues over my PhD). I thought I was hopelessly underqualified but to my surprise I had a call a few days later from someone willing to fly me down to Canberra, pay for a hotel, and put me through a round of interviews. I didn't get the job, but talking to the hiring team taught me:
* At least some non-scientific employers saw value in my PhD skills and training
* Those skills were more valuable for a mid-level position expected to work independently than for an entry-level position
* Applying for a more interesting senior position was a much nicer experience than applying for grad programs as one of thousands

I filed these ideas away for future use but had no time to apply them at the time: my thesis deadline was looming and all my efforts were now going toward finishing it.

Celebrating at the university bar after thesis submission in mid-March 2020 (the last Friday before COVID lockdowns hit) I was re-introduced to Dane McCamey, a physicist at UNSW who was interested in some of the work I'd done in my PhD. Dane was looking to hire a new post-doc on a 2 year contract and offered me the position over a beer. Thus, to my surprise, it turned out that there was a job waiting for me at the end after all.

### 2022
The COVID pandemic was stressful for most of us. After two years as an academic post-doc I decided that I'd had enough and it was time to find a job outsied of academia.

</details>

# Why am I writing this?
Most PhDs and ECRs seem to have no idea which jobs exist or how to get them. Until quite recently I was in a similar boat, but after a lot of trial-and-error and a lot of talking to non-academic friends and employers I think I have a much better sense of how to navigate the process. I'd like to share that.

## Q: I'm smart, flexible, and a world-leading specialist in something incomprehensible. What can I actually do?
## A: Probably something with "analyst" in the title.
You don't meet many self-described analysts in universities, but to employers an "analyst" seems to be someone who does the following:

1. Starting from a high-level overview of a field, identify a topic worth knowing more about.
2. Gather and curate data relating to that topic
3. Structure useful questions relating to that data, and use the answers to develop new insight
4. Distill those hard-won insights into outputs that can be understood by generalists and used to inform useful decision-making. 

These are the intellectual steps involved in conceiving, developing, and publishing a reserach project. If you can tell a short story of a research project you carried from start to finish without using impenetrable jargon like "magnetic resonance", "enantioselective", or "molecule" then you can probably sound like a plausible analyst. 

My sense is that junior roles are more likely to focus on steps 2 and 3 of the above: specialist technical work to generate specialist technical outputs. The higher-level thinking occurs in parts 1 and 4, where broad knowledge is used to identify valuable problems and where specialist insights are translated back into communication aimed at generalists. **I think this ability to combine specialist investigation with generalist subject-matter awareness, translating between the two as needed, is one of the most valuable selling points of a PhD in science**.

You don't need much specialist "domain knowledge" at this point - that's something you would develop in step 2 above. You *will* need to demonstrate interest, enthusiasm, and a high-level (broad but shallow) overview of the area you're applying for. You'll be asked open questions about the area in interviews: if you can't say something specific and factually informed, you'll be passed over. Think about why you want to work in the area, what the current challenges and opportunities are, and so on.

Depending on your coding experience (Python is fine), you might want to look at "data analyst" positions too. There are certainly lots around, but my sense is that there are also lots of people with relevant qualifications applying for those jobs. My suspicion is that this makes research types less competitive: high-level thinking and picking up new skills quickly is less valuable when plenty of others alrady have those skills.

### Use LinkedIn to find relevant jobs
I don't really use LinkedIn, but I fleshed out my profiled with portions copied/pasted from my CV (lots of keywords, lots of skills) and started browsing job postings once or twice a week. Whenever I saw anything that looked interesting and achievable, I saved it and clicked the "Apply" button (even if I wasn't actually going to apply). I assume LinkedIn's algorithms were tracking this because my suggested jobs got more relevant over times.



### Found something that might be OK? Call the contact person (on a phone!) and have a chat


### How high to aim?

I've had the most success aiming at mid-level positions. You're trying to sell yourself as someone very smart and flexible, capable of independently learning new things quickly and thinking about them critically, but who doesn't have subject matter experience in the field yet. I say mid-level because junior positions don't value that independence and flexibility as much (they want you to do what you're told), and you don't have the experience or connections for a senior position. Here in Aus that translates to a pay range of roughly $90-130k; I have no idea what the local equivalent is.

## Your CV is probably very bad (mine was), but it's not hard to make it better.
My skills were more desirable than I'd thought - but my CV was almost certainly much worse.

Get it down to one page, and remove all publications and presentations (leave major awards). Remove fluffy stuff listing skills or hobbies.

### Optimise for keyword/keyphrase matching
Think in terms of keywords and keyphrases: your CV is most likely going to be screened by a computer based on keyword matches, so the main trick here is to include lots of phrases that might be what they're after. Here's the start of mine - spot the key phrases. "data analysis", "data processing", "model-building", "communicating technical concepts".

### Cull irrelevant technical stuff—including publications
Spot what isn't there: basically any discussion of the actual research I did. There's no way the computer reading your CV will care, but if you get to an interview it's possible the interviewer will want to know (or more likely: they'll want to prompt you to speak on a technical topic they know nothing about and see if you're able to say anything that makes sense.

### Link to niche/technical stuff that you host elsewhere
You have a website, which is good, so I'd link pages that list your publications, presentations, research interests. None of that stuff is helpful on the CV, but if someone's considering hiring you they may well want to read more - linking it on an external site (that you run! impressive!) keeps the info accessible and the CV uncluttered.

## Have a clear and positive story of why you want this position

### Be interested in the area

### Learn to describe your skills generally (but have specific examples)

### Expect to be asked why you're leaving academia
You've spent 5-10 years working to become a research scientist and have now decided that it's time to do something else. It's almost guaranteed that someone will ask you to explain why.
 
Nobody wants to be a fallback plan. If you give the impression of wanting *a* job but not necessarily *this* job, that's a problem. Similarly, it's probably not helpful to answer this question with personal failure ("*I'm leaving because I couldn't get a grant/postdoc*") or bitterness ("*I'm leaving because the whole system is rotten and needs to be burned to the ground*").
I think it's best to talk about the positive things you hope to gain from a non-academic position. As a bonus, you can use those positives to gently skewer negative stereotypes the interviewer might already have about academics ("*I'm not one of **those** people - I'm leaving because of those people!*"). 

Here are some examples of things I've said:
* "*The subject of my research work is important, but my work has felt detached from society. I want to feel I'm making a more direct impact.*"
* "*I've enjoyed being able to work independently on my own projects, but at times I've felt isolated. I'd like to work more closely with other people as a team.*"
* "*I like to talk to other people about my work and share what I do, but it's hard when you work on something so specialised.*"
* "*Academic work is precarious with funding tied to external factors I have no control over. I want to be somewhere I can have more agency in my own success.*"

None of those are overly negative or a whinge. Each highlights desirable personal attributes: "*I want to make an impact*", "*I want to work with a team*", "*I value communication*". Most do so by contrasting those positives against negatives that people might associate with academics such as prickly individualism, pointless overspecialisation, and detachment from reality.

## Develop skills and general interest 
It's very useful here to be interested and broadly aware of areas outside your own: if you're looking at positions in energy and renewables then go follow lots of experts in the area on twitter, read relevant policy documents, and spend some time thinking about what's going on. 